if you saw a wormhole in reality it
would appear round spherical a bit like
a black hole
light from the other side passes through
and gives you a window to a far away
place
once crossed the other side comes for
the interview with your old home now
receding into that shimmering spherical
window
but are wormholes real or are they just
magic disguised as physics and mass
if they are real how do they work and
where can we find them
[Music]
for most of human history we thought
space was pretty simple a big flat stage
where the events of the universe unfold
even if you take down the set of planets
and stars there's still something left
that empty stage is space and it exists
unchanging and eternal
einstein's theory of relativity changed
that
it says that space and time make up that
stage together and they aren't the same
everywhere
the things on the stage can affect the
stage itself stretching and warping it
if the old stage was like unmoving
hardwood einstein's stage is more like a
water bed
this kind of elastic space can be bent
and maybe even torn and patched together
which could make wormholes possible
let's see what that would look like in
2d
our universe is like a big flat sheet
bent in just the right way wormholes
could connect two very very distant
spots with a short bridge that you could
cross almost instantaneously
enabling you to travel the universe even
faster than the speed of light
so where can we find a wormhole
presently only on paper
general relativity says they might be
possible but that doesn't mean they have
to exist
general relativity is a mathematical
theory it's a set of equations that have
many possible answers but not all maths
describes reality
but they are theoretically possible and
there are different kinds
the first kind of wormholes to be
theorized were einstein rosenbridges
they describe every black hole as a sort
of portal to an infinite parallel
universe
let's try to picture them in 2d again
empty space time is flat but curved by
objects on it
if we compress that object spacetime
gets more curved around it
eventually space-time becomes so warped
that it has no choice but to collapse
into a black hole
[Music]
a one-way barrier forms the event
horizon which anything can enter but
nothing can escape trapped forever at
the singularity at its core
but maybe there is no singularity here
one possibility is that the other side
of the event horizon looks a bit like
our universe again but mirrored upside
down where time runs backwards
in our universe things fall into the
black hole
in the parallel universe with backwards
time the mirror black hole is spewing
things out a bit like a big bang this is
called a white hole
unfortunately einstein rosenbridges
can't actually be crossed it takes an
infinite amount of time to cross over to
the opposite universe and they crimp
shut in the middle
if you go into a black hole you won't
become the stuff coming out of the white
hole you'll only become dead
so to travel the cosmos in the blink of
an eye humans need a different kind of
wormhole a traversible wormhole
[Music]
if string theory or one of its
variations is the correct description of
our universe then we could be lucky and
our universe might even have a tangled
web of countless wormholes already
shortly after the big bang quantum
fluctuations in the universe at the
smallest scales far far smaller than an
atom may have created many many
traversable wormholes
threaded through them are strings called
cosmic strings
in the first billionth of a trillionth
of a second after the big bang the ends
of these tiny tiny wormholes were pulled
light years apart scattering them
through the universe
if wormholes were made in the early
universe whether with cosmic strings or
some other way they could be all over
just waiting to be discovered
one might even be closer than we realize
from the outside black holes and
wormholes can look very similar leading
some physicists to suggest the
supermassive black holes in the centre
of galaxies are actually wormholes
it will be very hard to go all the way
to the center of the milky way to find
out though but that's okay
there might be an equally extremely hard
way to get our hands on a wormhole we
could try to make one
[Music]
to be traversable and useful there are a
few properties we want a wormhole to
have
first it must obviously connect two
distant parts of space-time
like your bedroom and the bathroom
or earth and jupiter
second it should not contain any event
horizons which would block two-way
travel third it should be sufficiently
sized so that the gravitational forces
don't kill human travelers
the biggest problem we have to solve is
keeping our wormholes open
no matter how we make wormholes gravity
tries to close them gravity wants to
pinch it closed and cut the bridge
leaving only black holes at the ends
whether it's a traversable wormhole with
both ends and hours or a wormhole to
another universe it will try to close
unless we have something propping it
open
for very old string theory wormholes
that's the cosmic strings job
for man-made wormholes we need a new
ingredient
exotic matter
this isn't anything like we find on
earth or even antimatter it's something
totally new and different and exciting
with crazy properties like nothing
that's ever been seen before
exotic matter is stuff that has negative
mass
positive mass like people and planets
and everything else in the universe is
attractive because of gravity
but negative mass would be repulsive it
would push you away
this makes a kind of anti-gravity that
props open our wormholes
and exotic matter must exert enormous
pressure to push space-time open greater
even than the pressure at the centers of
neutron stars
with exotic matter we could weave
space-time however we see fit
we may even have a candidate for this
exotic matter the vacuum of space itself
quantum fluctuations in empty space are
constantly creating pairs of particles
and anti-particles only for them to be
annihilated an instant later the vacuum
of space is boiling with them and we can
already manipulate them to produce an
effect similar to the negative mass
we're looking for
we could use this to stabilize our
wormholes
once we're keeping it open the ends
would start together so we'd have to
move them around to interesting places
we could start by wiring the solar
system leaving one end of each wormhole
in orbit around the earth
we could fling others into deep space
the earth could be a wormhole hub for a
vast interstellar human civilization
spread over light years but only a
wormhole away
however wormholes have a dark side
even opening a single wormhole kind of
breaks the universe in fundamental ways
potentially creating time travel
paradoxes and violating the causal
structure of the universe
many scientists think that this not only
means they should be impossible to make
but that it's impossible for them to
exist at all
so for now we only know that wormholes
exist in our hearts and on paper in the
form of equations
we know you want to know more about
universe stuff so we're trying something
new
courts consult and brilliant are
collaborating on a six-part video series
about our favorite science and space
things
thanks to their help there will be more
videos on this channel in the next six
months
kotzkusakt has worked with brilliant for
a while now and we love what they're
doing
in a nutshell brilliant helps you to get
ahead by mastering maths and science
skills through actively solving
challenging and fascinating problems
to support our collaboration with them
visit brilliant.org nutshell and sign up
for free today
the first 688 people that use the link
will get 20 off their annual premium
subscription
wait
[Music]
you